For this final match before the World Cup
finals, Eddie Clamp came in at right-half to make an all-Wolves half-back
line with clubmates Billy Wright and Bill Slater. Colin McDonald took over
in goal and Bolton's tough-tackling Tommy Banks was called in at
left-back. After the jolting defeat in Yugoslavia, England gave a much
more disciplined performance in the new Lenin Stadium and a Derek Kevan
goal just before half-time gave them a draw against a Russian side rated
one of the best in Europe. England might have won but for the goalkeeping
of the great 'Man in Black' Lev Yashin, and the intervention of the
woodwork when first Tom Finney and then Derek Kevan struck shots against a
post. The shock after the match was that Brian Clough, Middlesbrough's
untried goal master, was told he was not needed for the World Cup squad.
Cloughie had scored 42 goals in League and Cup matches that season and was
in red-hot form. Cloughie made no secret of his displeasure. It made no
sense to most people that the selectors decided to leave behind not only
Brian Clough, but also the vastly experienced Nat Lofthouse and the living
legend Stanley Matthews. Lofty had been in devastating form in the FA Cup
final against Manchester United when his two goals virtually won the
trophy for Bolton. The selectors could also have considered the young
Chelsea whizkid Jimmy Greaves. For some reason they chose to take only
twenty players, when twenty-two were allowed in each squad. England
arrived in Sweden just two days before the kick-off to the tournament and
were hardly the best prepared team going into the finals.